As some of you know, my name is Stephen. I've been coming to Citylight from the very first Sunday, though that was simply a happy accident. Exactly 2 years ago, my wife and I walked into this building looking for a new church, looking for a new start; little did I know what that would end up truly looking like. You see, in the past 2 years, my life has totally changed. I left graduate school, I started a new career in a completely new field, I started going to therapy for what I came to learn was depression, and then my marriage imploded, and the depression deepened, I started struggling with anxiety, self-worth, grief, and fear to some degree on a daily basis.

I remember one night in particular; I was lying in my bed, crying, the tears running across my cheeks and pooling in my ears, and I was begging God--*begging*--for that "easy yoke" Jesus speaks about in the Gospels. "God, I trust, I know, that Your yoke *is* easy and Your burden truly is light. You are a God that offers grace and peace to Your children. Lord, whatever you ask, I will give it; please, please; all I ask is even the faintest touch of Your grace and peace, Your light burden." I honestly do not believe I have ever prayed as earnestly and vulnerably as I did that night.

But here's the thing: I opened my eyes and everything felt the same. I woke up the next morning and everything felt the same; the pain, the sadness -- the same. My wife moved out, we began the divorce proceedings, I moved into a dingy studio apartment; life kept going and I didn't feel like God was answering my prayer. But I kept coming to church; I went to citygroup; I spent time with my friends from church; and I was honest with people about my struggles. And person after person from this church met me in that pain. And slowly God began to give me eyes to see how he was answering my prayer.

I came to see that God doesn't offer to swap our heavy burden with some other, lighter burden. Ours is a God who carried a cross to his death; ours is a God who calls us to pick up our cross and follow Him; ours is a God who sees and feels and knows and shoulders the burden. No, He does not offer a different burden; He offers to come up under the yoke and bear the burden alongside us. He gives us the strength to do all things through and with Christ, who is strengthening us.

Now, and this is important, I didn't come to see how God was indeed answering my prayer simply by meditating on theology, by reading my Bible, by praying more (though each of these things are clearly important). No, I slowly came to see Jesus standing with me, carrying my burden with me, *through* my friends here at Citylight who came and would carry my burden with me. I had friends who were willing to be the hands and feet of Christ in my life.

And now, today, I can honestly say that I do feel the grace and peace of God in my life. I feel the grace to stand before you all today and be vulnerable and honest, to say that God is good and also that I still struggle everyday. I feel the peace to cry in public because pain is real and it hurts. And I understand that my burden is indeed light, not because the pain is any less real or hurts any less, but because I worship a God who became man, struggled under his own cross up the hill to his own tortuous death *and then* conquered death so that he could struggle with me and my cross. And in all honesty, my burden grows lighter and lighter each time I accept the call to be the hands and feet of that God and lean in to shoulder someone else's burden. Thanks be to God.
