We often draw more general, abstract implications from the imagery and metaphors of the story of the Creation and the Fall, even though we believe that it is true (2nd degree; it is correct to say that the account is true). For instance, Adam is a “type” of Christ; that is, he prefigures Christ. However, little to no such work has been done on the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. This is clearly a strange name, ripe for a more abstract interpretation. What theological implications might it have?

First, it implies that a major change between Pre- and Post-Fall involves Knowledge. This is quite interesting, as most thought concerning the Fall centers on Ethics, Morality, or Psychology. The Bible itself, however, offers Epistemology as the key theoretical framework.

Second, it implies that our Knowledge Post-Fall is different because it is a Knowledge of Good and Evil. This can have various significances itself, but I wish to focus on the suggestion that this Post-Fall Knowledge, as modeled in the Knowledge of Good and Evil, connotes a Binary Knowledge. My belief is that our Knowledge Pre-Fall was thus non-binary. What that would be like is beyond our grasp, but insofar as eating of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil made binary thinking the default for humanity, binary thinking is tainted.

In sum, the fact that the linchpin of the Fall was the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil suggests that Epistemology is the primary theoretical framework through which to view the change that occurred to human existence, and that this change brought about a Binary view of knowledge, which is flawed.
