Note: I apologize in advance. This is as short as possible, but also fairly dense. Nonetheless, I think this is very important and worth wrapping our minds around.

Jacques Derrida, a 20th century French philosopher, was the father of Deconstruction. I believe that one aspect of Deconstruction, specifically its view of Language and Reality, proves fruitful for Theological thinking.

Under Derrida’s thinking, Language imparts Meaning through Differentiation and Deferral (Differance). The sharpest form of constructed Meaning derives from Binaries. Because Meaning is constructed from “that which is not” (i.e. through Differentiation with other Terms), a Binary set of Differentials offers the sharpest distinction. Meaning is a form of Representation, or Supplement.

As an example, Derrida offers the Sun. One cannot look directly at the sun because as soon as you do, you go blind. Imagine that the Sun represents Reality, “that which is”, τό ὄν. As humans, stuck within the Web of Language (cf. Kant’s critique of Pure Reason), we cannot look directly at Reality, we have no access to it in its purity. However, if the Sun gives itself to be Repeated, Supplemented, Imitated, there exists something to look at. Note, however, that Imitation is definitionally, essentially, that which is not the Original. If a Copy were Identical, it would be a Clone, not an Imitation. To be an Imitation, there must be something different about the Copy. Thus, the essence of an Imitation is that which is not the Original. Remember, though, that we NEED to say something about the Sun, about Reality.

We think Logically. To think logically is to Define, to Delimit terms: X is Y. The clearest Delimitation comes from Binaries. To communicate X-ness, it is easiest to contrast it with Z, with non-X. However, we are not talking about X-ness, only its Imitation, which is defined essentially by that which is non-X. Thus, copular statements (X is Y) are Phantasms, because we only understand X through Differentiation and Deferral, thus through Imitation, which is non-X. Thus, any copular statement really states X is non-X: as Derrida puts it, “Nontruth is the truth. Nonpresence is presence.”

This is the Derridean unthinkable thought, the precondition for seeing another space from which to think about Reality. We need to recognize that we can’t look directly at the Sun, that we aren’t able, absolutely, to make copular statements. Language works with Imitations, with Signifiers. Thought works with Signifiers. We have no direct access to the Signified. We only have the limited access available through the Signifiers, through the Imitations. These imitations are a unique class, since they are both X (b/c their Sameness unites them with the Original) and non-X (b/c there Difference is essential to their status as Imitation). In order to think clearly about Reality, we need to know the limits of Analogous Thought, but this first requires a better understanding of our Epistemic Position.

Note, however, that Derrida’s Metaphor of the Sun breaks down when he imparts Agency to the inanimate, stable, unmoving Essence that is Realtiy. The Sun “gives itself” to be imitated. This makes no sense. Under the Theological perspective, however, the Son is Personal, is an Agent. Here, the Metaphor is perfectly sensible.
